---
layout: post
title:  "Birdseye - CNN Bird Classifier"
date: 2020-12-12 8:00:03 +0200
categories: Projects
---

# Bird Classification using Deep learning

This project is aimed at providing a bird classifier based on deep learning. It is still in progress, although on hold for a moment, but I already created an MVP in form of a deployed prototype.

The endgoal is to provide an app for users to upload pictures of birds (and possibly audio track with bird calls) and subsequently receive an accurate classification as well as some information about the bird species they encountered.

The project is on hold right now as I realized that I needed to take a step back from modeling. So far the model achieves good accuracy, yet still makes too many mistakes to be useful in an applied setting. This is partially due to the large number of classes and partially due to the data consisting of very high quality images that may not match the typical users input. So far even data augmentation could not resolve the issue completely.

I intend to group birds based on continents and ask the user to input a continent first (e.g. where did they take the picture), then provide a classifier for each continent. This should lead to less classes per trained model. 
Additionally many european (and other continents) birds (e.g. a red kite) are still missing, as much of the data stems from a US database. I aim to slowly build up the database to include more birds from all continents.
If the image classification works very well, additional models could be trained on audio data of bird calls to provide another medium for users to classify their bird encounters by (as birds can be very tricky to photograph).

# Resources
You can find a deployed prototype [here](https://birds-eye.herokuapp.com/). *Please note that it may take a moment to load*

This [repository](https://github.com/MerlinSchaefer/birdseye) only contains the code necessary to run the prototype. The code utilizes a CPU based implementation right now as heroku does not provide GPUs.

This [Medium Post](https://towardsdatascience.com/quick-and-easy-deep-learning-webapp-762f92f19f46) (which was also my first Medium post) goes through some of the basic steps. Although my explorations have been more extensive.